---
layout: post
title:  "Proposal"
date:   2020-08-30 23:55:55 -0300
---

By creating tools for specific purposes, the human being set in motion a
process of environmental and self change that reaches the present, embedding
the globe, our bodies and psyches with technology. Culture embraces
innovations, art redefines them.

```
#hack #demoscene #glitch #datamosh #click&cuts #glitchhop #vaporwave #synthwave
#meme #socialmedia #mass #softwarelibre
```

There has been several artistic movements/phenomena in the recent past that
approached art from a hacking perspective by pushing production tools'
boundaries, such as the demoscene in the 90s (caracterized by crackers who
looked for hardware and software limitations of computers and videogame
consoles to create optimized programs for musical and visual composition, and
later, work with error as aesthetic resource). But with a socialized internet
and established platforms for social interaction and content creation a new
wave of artists appeared in the 2000s, using online and free software tools to
manipulate and hack digital material such as glitch art (with digital image
techniques as data bending and data moshing, or digital music genres as
click&cuts or glitch hop). Other examples of cultural impact of this massive
access to production tools can be genres such as vaporwave and synthwave, or
even communication expanders like memes.

```
#blackmidi 
```

Among other new cultural manifestations, we are especially interested in Black
MIDI. Arised in social media, this artistic practice was born in 2009 when
Shirasagi Yukki uploaded to Nico Nico Douga (a japanese video-sharing service
similar to YouTube) a video of a reinterpreted version of a popular videogame
song, composed with a high number of MIDI notes (piece intended to be executed
by devices, not piano/keyboard human players). Also known as blackened musical
notation due to the black note head stains in a score (if translating MIDI to
pentagram), this practice articulates both visual and sound aspect. The MIDI
notes flow down the screen and activates the notes of an horizontal piano roll,
located at the bottom, producing moving visual patterns. By virtue of this
activation, sound is perceived, sometimes as rhythm, melody and harmony and
sometimes as a dense, homogenic timbre, due to clusters created by note
duplication and addition processes. Both visual and sound aspects were
thoroughly explored by the increasing number of people who started producing
and uploading their own Black MIDI videos and organizing virtual challenges. 

```
#diversity #development
```

As creative code enthusiasts we want to appropriate Black MIDI aesthetic
resource with a strong ludic and experimental approach to update and expand it
by hybridizing it with several technologies via different programming languages
and tools. We want to explore the image and sound relationship, focusing on
each one. 

```
#stroboscopicanimation #phenakistiscope #bioscope #python #mido #pygame #omnimidi
```

We developed a script in Python that allows automatic image to MIDI conversion,
enabling us to use any video source as input to get MIDI sequences in a score,
which will work as frames in a tape, by reproducing it with Mido and Pygame
(Python libraries to read/send MIDI data and to create a visual interface,
respectively). Our device output reminds of antique stroboscopic animations.

```
#livecoding #hydra #javascript #shaders #glsl #bytebeat
```

We would like to explore short animation narratives in this upcycled device,
and also explore visual and sound rhythm by working with digital video
synthesizers such as Hydra, a live coding language made in JavaScript, shader
languages as GLSL, or by writing "bytebeat formulas" and converting them to
MIDI to visualize sound waveforms. 

In this preliminary stage we also realized that some animation MIDI patterns
produces a sound which, when observed in any DAW (Digital Audio Workspace)
shows beautiful sound waves. We might want to use those for further visual
pieces. 

```
#pianola #speakingpiano #patterns #tidalcycles #conlonnancarrow #bytebeat #flok
```

But we would also like to explore the image/sound relationship by focusing on
different sound-oriented strategies. Just as Conlon Nancarrow in the late
1940's experimented with musical composition through fractal patterns applied
to sound duration and pitch in his player piano studies, we would like to
explore high density MIDI patterns generated with TidalCycles, a language made
with Haskell for live coding rhythmic sequences and sound processes. Besides,
we would like to work with semantic language by adapting the speaking piano
technique, by which a spectrogram of spoken word activates frequencies areas in
a piano. 

Finally, we would like to adapt an online collaborative script editor we
developed named Flok (made with JavaScript) for remote live coding jams with
the aim of building an online collaborative tool to live code a Black Coded
MIDI device that helps building new non-utilitary human bonds. 
